hey this is presto Walker and you're
watching mind your decisions
consider the following diagram the blue
circles radius is 4 and the green
circles radius is 2 the line is tangent
to all three circles and the three
circles touch each other they are
pairwise tangent what is the radius of
the white circle I think Devin from
Indonesia at the Lilin bangsa
intercultural school for suggesting this
problem it was a challenge problem for
students aged 14 and 15 can you figure
it out give this problem a try and when
you're ready keep watching the video for
a solution so how can we solve this
problem well it will involve connecting
the Centers of these circles the large
circle has a radius of 4 the next
largest circle has a radius of 2 and
we'll label the third circles radius as
little R now we can create three
different right triangles by connecting
the Centers of these circles the first
triangle will connect the center of this
small circle to the center of the circle
with radius of 4 this will be a right
triangle its hypotenuse will be the sum
of the two radii it'll be 4 plus R one
of its legs will be the difference
between 4 and R so that'll be 4 minus R
the other leg of this triangle we can
solve using the Pythagorean theorem this
will be the square root of the quantity
4 plus R squared minus the quantity 4
minus R squared we can simplify this to
be 4 times the square root of R now we
can do a similar thing with the other
circle that is a radius of 2 its
hypotenuse will be 2 plus R one of its
legs will be 2 minus R and we can solve
for the length of the other leg using
the
Pythagorean theorem it'll be similar
calculation and we'll get this is two
times the square root of 2 multiplied by
the square root of R now there's one
more right triangle to consider this
will connect the Centers of the two
larger circles the hypotenuse will be
the sum of the radii four plus two is
equal to six one leg will be four minus
two and that's equal to two other leg is
parallel to the two lengths at the
bottom so this will be square root of R
times the quantity 4 plus two times the
square root of two we can then use the
Pythagorean theorem and we'll get six
squared minus two squared is equal to
the square of this other leg we then do
some algebra and simplify it and now
you're going to divide by four plus two
times the square root of two squared now
in order to simplify that you can
multiply the numerator and the
denominator by 4 minus two times the
square root of two squared and you'll
end up rationalizing this fraction and
you'll get that R is equal to 12 minus 8
times the square root of two and that's
our answer
so that's our answer for these specific
lengths but can we generalize this what
would happen if our two larger circles
had arbitrary values well we can modify
this diagram as follows suppose the
largest circle has a radius of capital R
1 and the next largest circle has a
radius of capital R sub 2 we still have
the following three triangles and we can
figure out the lengths of each of these
sides as we just did before the
hypotenuse of each triangle will be the
sum of the two radii one leg will be the
difference of the radii and we can solve
for the other leg using the Pythagorean
theorem in this case we'll just label it
as x1 and we could set up the following
equation using the Pythagorean theorem
we'll do the same thing for the green
triangle we have x2
to express using the Pythagorean theorem
and now in this third triangle which is
in purple we can solve for this leg as
the sum of X 1 plus X 2 and we can also
use the Pythagorean theorem now with
some effort we can solve for R little R
that is and we'll get the following
equation 1 divided by the square root of
R is equal to 1 divided by the square
root of R 1 plus 1 divided by the square
root of R 2 and like magic we figured
out an equation that we can solve for
little R regardless of the values of big
R 1 and big R 2 tremendous did you
figure it out and did you solve for this
general relationship thanks for watching
these math videos which can be watched
for free inspire and build confidence
for people around the world and they
already have over a hundred million
views let's share the beauty of
mathematics with your help we can map
the world a better place please
subscribe for free to get the newest
videos watch and share all of mine your
decisions videos email me a puzzle or
math topic presh and mind your decisions
calm and if you so choose you can check
out my books which are listed in the
video description and you can support me
on patreon to earn exclusive rewards
thanks for watching and thanks for your
support